en/index.rst, before:

.. CakePHP Cookbook documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Tue Jan 18 12:54:14 2011.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome
#######

The CakePHP cookbook is an openly developed and community editable documentation
project. We hope to maintain a high level of quality, validity and accuracy for
the documentation. Notice the "Improve this Doc" button in the upper right-hand
corner; it will direct you to the GitHub online editor of the active page,
allowing you to easily contribute any additions, deletions, or corrections to
the documentation.

.. container:: offline-download

    **Read the Book Anywhere**

    .. image:: /_static/img/read-the-book.jpg

    Enjoy the CakePHP cookbook almost anywhere. Available as both a PDF and
    EPUB, you can now read it on more devices, as well as offline.

    - `PDF <../_downloads/en/CakePHPCookbook.pdf>`_
    - `EPUB <../_downloads/en/CakePHPCookbook.epub>`_
    - `Original Source <http://github.com/cakephp/docs>`_

Getting Started
===============

Build a Blog
------------

Get started with the :doc:`blog tutorial</tutorials-and-examples/blog/blog>`.
You'll learn the basics of CakePHP, and build a basic blog in the process.

Conventions
-----------

Learn about a typical :doc:`CakePHP request
</getting-started/a-typical-cakephp-request>` and the :doc:`conventions
</getting-started/cakephp-conventions>` that power CakePHP.

Controllers
-----------

Controllers handle requests and help co-ordinate and prepare
responses for the client. Read more about :doc:`/controllers`.

Views
-----

Views are the presentation layer in CakePHP. They convert
the data fetched from Models into the output format requested by the
client. Read more about :doc:`/views`.

Models
------

Models are the heart of your application. They handle the validation,
storage and retrieval of your data. Read more about :doc:`/models`.

Getting Help
============

If you're stuck, there are a number of places :doc:`you can get help
</cakephp-overview/where-to-get-help>`.



.. meta::
    :title lang=en: .. CakePHP Cookbook documentation master file, created by
    :keywords lang=en: doc models,documentation master,presentation layer,documentation project,quickstart,original source,sphinx,liking,cookbook,validity,conventions,validation,cakephp,accuracy,storage and retrieval,heart,blog,project hope

Commit message:

Add warning to the 2.x docs.
Warn people who end up on the landing page of the 2.x docs that they
might be in the wrong place.

en/index.rst, after:

.. CakePHP Cookbook documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Tue Jan 18 12:54:14 2011.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome
#######

.. warning::
    This version of the documentation is for CakePHP 2.x. Go `here for the
    CakePHP 3.x documentation <http://book.cakephp.org/3.0/>`_.

The CakePHP cookbook is an openly developed and community editable documentation
project. We hope to maintain a high level of quality, validity and accuracy for
the documentation. Notice the "Improve this Doc" button in the upper right-hand
corner; it will direct you to the GitHub online editor of the active page,
allowing you to easily contribute any additions, deletions, or corrections to
the documentation.

.. container:: offline-download

    **Read the Book Anywhere**

    .. image:: /_static/img/read-the-book.jpg

    Enjoy the CakePHP cookbook almost anywhere. Available as both a PDF and
    EPUB, you can now read it on more devices, as well as offline.

    - `PDF <../_downloads/en/CakePHPCookbook.pdf>`_
    - `EPUB <../_downloads/en/CakePHPCookbook.epub>`_
    - `Original Source <http://github.com/cakephp/docs>`_

Getting Started
===============

Build a Blog
------------

Get started with the :doc:`blog tutorial</tutorials-and-examples/blog/blog>`.
You'll learn the basics of CakePHP, and build a basic blog in the process.

Conventions
-----------

Learn about a typical :doc:`CakePHP request
</getting-started/a-typical-cakephp-request>` and the :doc:`conventions
</getting-started/cakephp-conventions>` that power CakePHP.

Controllers
-----------

Controllers handle requests and help co-ordinate and prepare
responses for the client. Read more about :doc:`/controllers`.

Views
-----

Views are the presentation layer in CakePHP. They convert
the data fetched from Models into the output format requested by the
client. Read more about :doc:`/views`.

Models
------

Models are the heart of your application. They handle the validation,
storage and retrieval of your data. Read more about :doc:`/models`.

Getting Help
============

If you're stuck, there are a number of places :doc:`you can get help
</cakephp-overview/where-to-get-help>`.



.. meta::
    :title lang=en: .. CakePHP Cookbook documentation master file, created by
    :keywords lang=en: doc models,documentation master,presentation layer,documentation project,quickstart,original source,sphinx,liking,cookbook,validity,conventions,validation,cakephp,accuracy,storage and retrieval,heart,blog,project hope
