en/intro.rst, before:

CakePHP at a Glance
###################

CakePHP is designed to make common web-development tasks simple, and easy. By
providing an all-in-one toolbox to get you started the various parts of CakePHP
work well together or separately.

The goal of this overview is to introduce the general concepts in CakePHP, and
give you a quick overview of how those concepts are implemented in CakePHP. If
you are itching to get started on a project, you can :doc:`start with the
tutorial </tutorials-and-examples/bookmarks/intro>`, or :doc:`dive into the docs
</topics>`.

Conventions Over Configuration
==============================

CakePHP provides a basic organizational structure that covers class names,
filenames, database table names, and other conventions. While the conventions
take some time to learn, by following the conventions CakePHP provides you can
avoid needless configuration and make a uniform application structure that makes
working with various projects simple. The :doc:`conventions chapter
</intro/conventions>` covers the various conventions that CakePHP uses.


The Model Layer
===============

The Model layer represents the part of your application that implements the
business logic. It is responsible for retrieving data and converting it into the
primary meaningful concepts in your application. This includes processing,
validating, associating or other tasks related to handling data.

In the case of a social network, the Model layer would take care of
tasks such as saving the user data, saving friends' associations, storing
and retrieving user photos, finding suggestions for new friends, etc.
The model objects can be thought of as "Friend", "User", "Comment", or
"Photo". If we wanted to load some data from our ``users`` table we could do::

    use Cake\ORM\TableRegistry;

    $users = TableRegistry::get('Users');
    $query = $users->find();
    foreach ($query as $row) {
        echo $row->username;
    }

You may notice that we didn't have to write any code before we could start
working with our data. By using conventions, CakePHP will use standard classes
for table and entity classes that have not yet been defined.

If we wanted to make a new user and save it (with validation) we would do
something like::

    use Cake\ORM\TableRegistry;

    $users = TableRegistry::get('Users');
    $user = $users->newEntity(['email' => 'mark@example.com']);
    $users->save($user);

The View Layer
==============

The View layer renders a presentation of modeled data. Being separate from the
Model objects, it is responsible for using the information it has available
to produce any presentational interface your application might need.

For example, the view could use model data to render an HTML view template containing it,
or a XML formatted result for others to consume::

    // In a view template file, we'll render an 'element' for each user.
    <?php foreach ($users as $user): ?>
        <li class="user">
            <?= $this->element('user', ['user' => $user]) ?>
        </li>
    <?php endforeach; ?>

The View layer provides a number of extension points like :ref:`view-templates`, :ref:`view-elements`
and :doc:`/views/cells` to let you re-use your presentation logic.

The View layer is not only limited to HTML or text representation of the data.
It can be used to deliver common data formats like JSON, XML, and through
a pluggable architecture any other format you may need, such as CSV.

The Controller Layer
====================

The Controller layer handles requests from users. It is responsible for
rendering a response with the aid of both the Model and the View layers.

A controller can be seen as a manager that ensures that all resources needed for
completing a task are delegated to the correct workers. It waits for petitions
from clients, checks their validity according to authentication or authorization
rules, delegates data fetching or processing to the model, selects the type of
presentational data that the clients are accepting, and finally delegates the
rendering process to the View layer. An example of a user registration
controller would be::

    public function add()
    {
        $user = $this->Users->newEntity();
        if ($this->request->is('post')) {
            $user = $this->Users->patchEntity($user, $this->request->data);
            if ($this->Users->save($user, ['validate' => 'registration'])) {
                $this->Flash->success(__('You are now registered.'));
            } else {
                $this->Flash->error(__('There were some problems.'));
            }
        }
        $this->set('user', $user);
    }

You may notice that we never explicitly rendered a view. CakePHP's conventions
will take care of selecting the right view and rendering it with the view data
we prepared with ``set()``.

.. _request-cycle:

CakePHP Request Cycle
=====================

Now that you are familiar with the different layers in CakePHP, lets review how
a request cycle works in CakePHP:

.. figure:: /_static/img/typical-cake-request.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Flow diagram showing a typical CakePHP request

The typical CakePHP request cycle starts with a user requesting a page or
resource in your application. At a high level each request goes through the
following steps:

#. The webserver rewrite rules direct the request to **webroot/index.php**.
#. Your application's autoloader and bootstrap files are executed.
#. Any :doc:`dispatch filters </development/dispatch-filters>` that are
   configured can handle the request, and optionally generate a response.
#. The dispatcher selects the appropriate controller & action based on routing rules.
#. The controller's action is called and the controller interacts with the
   required Models and Components.
#. The controller delegates response creation to the View to generate the output
   resulting from the model data.
#. The view uses Helpers and Cells to generate the response body and headers.
#. The response is sent back to the client.

Just the Start
==============

Hopefully this quick overview has piqued your interest. Some other great
features in CakePHP are:

* A :doc:`caching </core-libraries/caching>` framework that integrates with
  Memcached, Redis and other backends.
* Powerful :doc:`code generation tools
  </bake/usage>` so you can start immediately.
* :doc:`Integrated testing framework </development/testing>` so you can ensure
  your code works perfectly.

The next obvious steps are to :doc:`download CakePHP </installation>`, read the
:doc:`tutorial and build something awesome
</tutorials-and-examples/bookmarks/intro>`.

Additional Reading
==================

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    /intro/where-to-get-help
    /intro/conventions
    /intro/cakephp-folder-structure

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Getting Started
    :keywords lang=en: folder structure,table names,initial request,database table,organizational structure,rst,filenames,conventions,mvc,web page,sit

Commit message:

Update intro to include middleware.
Refs #4179

en/intro.rst, after:

CakePHP at a Glance
###################

CakePHP is designed to make common web-development tasks simple, and easy. By
providing an all-in-one toolbox to get you started the various parts of CakePHP
work well together or separately.

The goal of this overview is to introduce the general concepts in CakePHP, and
give you a quick overview of how those concepts are implemented in CakePHP. If
you are itching to get started on a project, you can :doc:`start with the
tutorial </tutorials-and-examples/bookmarks/intro>`, or :doc:`dive into the docs
</topics>`.

Conventions Over Configuration
==============================

CakePHP provides a basic organizational structure that covers class names,
filenames, database table names, and other conventions. While the conventions
take some time to learn, by following the conventions CakePHP provides you can
avoid needless configuration and make a uniform application structure that makes
working with various projects simple. The :doc:`conventions chapter
</intro/conventions>` covers the various conventions that CakePHP uses.


The Model Layer
===============

The Model layer represents the part of your application that implements the
business logic. It is responsible for retrieving data and converting it into the
primary meaningful concepts in your application. This includes processing,
validating, associating or other tasks related to handling data.

In the case of a social network, the Model layer would take care of
tasks such as saving the user data, saving friends' associations, storing
and retrieving user photos, finding suggestions for new friends, etc.
The model objects can be thought of as "Friend", "User", "Comment", or
"Photo". If we wanted to load some data from our ``users`` table we could do::

    use Cake\ORM\TableRegistry;

    $users = TableRegistry::get('Users');
    $query = $users->find();
    foreach ($query as $row) {
        echo $row->username;
    }

You may notice that we didn't have to write any code before we could start
working with our data. By using conventions, CakePHP will use standard classes
for table and entity classes that have not yet been defined.

If we wanted to make a new user and save it (with validation) we would do
something like::

    use Cake\ORM\TableRegistry;

    $users = TableRegistry::get('Users');
    $user = $users->newEntity(['email' => 'mark@example.com']);
    $users->save($user);

The View Layer
==============

The View layer renders a presentation of modeled data. Being separate from the
Model objects, it is responsible for using the information it has available
to produce any presentational interface your application might need.

For example, the view could use model data to render an HTML view template containing it,
or a XML formatted result for others to consume::

    // In a view template file, we'll render an 'element' for each user.
    <?php foreach ($users as $user): ?>
        <li class="user">
            <?= $this->element('user', ['user' => $user]) ?>
        </li>
    <?php endforeach; ?>

The View layer provides a number of extension points like :ref:`view-templates`, :ref:`view-elements`
and :doc:`/views/cells` to let you re-use your presentation logic.

The View layer is not only limited to HTML or text representation of the data.
It can be used to deliver common data formats like JSON, XML, and through
a pluggable architecture any other format you may need, such as CSV.

The Controller Layer
====================

The Controller layer handles requests from users. It is responsible for
rendering a response with the aid of both the Model and the View layers.

A controller can be seen as a manager that ensures that all resources needed for
completing a task are delegated to the correct workers. It waits for petitions
from clients, checks their validity according to authentication or authorization
rules, delegates data fetching or processing to the model, selects the type of
presentational data that the clients are accepting, and finally delegates the
rendering process to the View layer. An example of a user registration
controller would be::

    public function add()
    {
        $user = $this->Users->newEntity();
        if ($this->request->is('post')) {
            $user = $this->Users->patchEntity($user, $this->request->data);
            if ($this->Users->save($user, ['validate' => 'registration'])) {
                $this->Flash->success(__('You are now registered.'));
            } else {
                $this->Flash->error(__('There were some problems.'));
            }
        }
        $this->set('user', $user);
    }

You may notice that we never explicitly rendered a view. CakePHP's conventions
will take care of selecting the right view and rendering it with the view data
we prepared with ``set()``.

.. _request-cycle:

CakePHP Request Cycle
=====================

Now that you are familiar with the different layers in CakePHP, lets review how
a request cycle works in CakePHP:

.. figure:: /_static/img/typical-cake-request.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Flow diagram showing a typical CakePHP request

The typical CakePHP request cycle starts with a user requesting a page or
resource in your application. At a high level each request goes through the
following steps:

#. The webserver rewrite rules direct the request to **webroot/index.php**.
#. Your Application is loaded and bound to an ``HttpServer``.
#. Your application's middleware is initialized.
#. A request and response is dispatched through the PSR-7 Middleware that your
   application uses. Typically this includes, error trapping, and routing.
#. If no response is returned from the middleware and the request contains
   routing information, a controller & action are selected.
#. The controller's action is called and the controller interacts with the
   required Models and Components.
#. The controller delegates response creation to the View to generate the output
   resulting from the model data.
#. The view uses Helpers and Cells to generate the response body and headers.
#. The response is sent back out through the :doc:`/controllers/middleware`.
#. The ``HttpServer`` emits the response to the webserver.

Just the Start
==============

Hopefully this quick overview has piqued your interest. Some other great
features in CakePHP are:

* A :doc:`caching </core-libraries/caching>` framework that integrates with
  Memcached, Redis and other backends.
* Powerful :doc:`code generation tools
  </bake/usage>` so you can start immediately.
* :doc:`Integrated testing framework </development/testing>` so you can ensure
  your code works perfectly.

The next obvious steps are to :doc:`download CakePHP </installation>`, read the
:doc:`tutorial and build something awesome
</tutorials-and-examples/bookmarks/intro>`.

Additional Reading
==================

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    /intro/where-to-get-help
    /intro/conventions
    /intro/cakephp-folder-structure

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Getting Started
    :keywords lang=en: folder structure,table names,initial request,database table,organizational structure,rst,filenames,conventions,mvc,web page,sit
