Where to Get Help
#################

The Official CakePHP website
============================

`http://www.cakephp.org <http://www.cakephp.org>`_

The Official CakePHP website is always a great place to visit. It
features links to oft-used developer tools, screencasts, donation
opportunities, and downloads.

The Cookbook
============

`http://book.cakephp.org <http://book.cakephp.org>`_

This manual should probably be the first place you go to get
answers. As with many other open source projects, we get new folks
regularly. Try your best to answer your questions on your own
first. Answers may come slower, but will remain longer – and you'll
also be lightening our support load. Both the manual and the API
have an online component.

The Bakery
==========

`http://bakery.cakephp.org <http://bakery.cakephp.org>`_

The CakePHP Bakery is a clearing house for all things CakePHP.
Check it out for tutorials, case studies, and code examples. Once
you’re acquainted with CakePHP, log on and share your knowledge
with the community and gain instant fame and fortune.

The API
=======

`http://api.cakephp.org/ <http://api.cakephp.org/>`_

Straight to the point and straight from the core developers, the
CakePHP API (Application Programming Interface) is the most
comprehensive documentation around for all the nitty gritty details
of the internal workings of the framework. Its a straight forward
code reference, so bring your propeller hat.

CakeForge
=========

`http://www.cakeforge.org <http://www.cakeforge.org>`_

CakeForge is another developer resource you can use to host your
CakePHP projects to share with others. If you’re looking for (or
want to share) a killer component or a praiseworthy plugin, check
out CakeForge.

The Test Cases
==============

If you ever feel the information provided in the API is not
sufficient, check out the code of the test cases provided with
CakePHP. They can serve as practical examples for function and
data member usage for a class.::

    lib/Cake/tests/Case

The IRC channel
===============

**IRC Channels on irc.freenode.net:**


-  `#cakephp <irc://irc.freenode.net/cakephp>`_ -- General
   Discussion
-  `#cakephp-docs <irc://irc.freenode.net/cakephp-docs>`_ --
   Documentation
-  `#cakephp-bakery <irc://irc.freenode.net/cakephp-bakery>`_ --
   Bakery

If you’re stumped, give us a holler in the CakePHP IRC channel.
Someone from the development team is usually there, especially
during the daylight hours for North and South America users. We’d
love to hear from you, whether you need some help, want to find
users in your area, or would like to donate your brand new sports
car.

The Google Group
================

`http://groups.google.com/group/cake-php <http://groups.google.com/group/cake-php>`_

CakePHP also has a very active Google Group. It can be a great
resource for finding archived answers, frequently asked questions,
and getting answers to immediate problems.
