en/appendices/2-10-migration-guide.rst, before:

2.10 Migration Guide
####################

CakePHP 2.10 is a fully API compatible upgrade from 2.9 This page outlines
the changes and improvements made in 2.10.

Model
=====

* ``Model::find()`` now supports ``having`` and ``lock`` options that enable you
  to add ``HAVING`` and ``FOR UPDATE`` locking clauses to your find operations.

Components
==========

* ``SecurityComponent`` now emits more verbose error messages when form
  tampering or CSRF protection fails in debug mode. This feature was backported
  from 3.x
* ``FlashComponent`` now stacks messages of the same type. This is a feature
  backport from 3.x. To disable this behavior, add ``'clear' => true`` to the
  configuration for FlashComponent.

Helpers
=======

* ``HtmlHelper::image()`` now supports the ``base64`` option. This option will
  read local image files and create base64 data URIs.
* ``HtmlHelper::addCrumb()`` had the ``prepend`` option added. This lets you
  prepend a breadcrumb instead of appending to the list.

Routing
=======

* ``Router::reverseToArray()`` was added.

Commit message:

Add docs for smallinteger and tinyinteger types.
Refs cakephp/cakephp#10347

en/appendices/2-10-migration-guide.rst, after:

2.10 Migration Guide
####################

CakePHP 2.10 is a fully API compatible upgrade from 2.9 This page outlines
the changes and improvements made in 2.10.

Model
=====

* New abstract types were added for ``smallinteger`` and ``tinyinteger``.
  Existing ``SMALLINT`` and ``TINYINT`` columns will now be reflected as these
  new abstract types.
* ``Model::find()`` now supports ``having`` and ``lock`` options that enable you
  to add ``HAVING`` and ``FOR UPDATE`` locking clauses to your find operations.

Components
==========

* ``SecurityComponent`` now emits more verbose error messages when form
  tampering or CSRF protection fails in debug mode. This feature was backported
  from 3.x
* ``FlashComponent`` now stacks messages of the same type. This is a feature
  backport from 3.x. To disable this behavior, add ``'clear' => true`` to the
  configuration for FlashComponent.

Helpers
=======

* ``HtmlHelper::image()`` now supports the ``base64`` option. This option will
  read local image files and create base64 data URIs.
* ``HtmlHelper::addCrumb()`` had the ``prepend`` option added. This lets you
  prepend a breadcrumb instead of appending to the list.
* ``FormHelper`` creates 'numeric' inputs for ``smallinteger`` and
  ``tinyinteger`` types.

Routing
=======

* ``Router::reverseToArray()`` was added.
