en/appendices/3-3-migration-guide.rst, before:

3.3 Migration Guide
###################

CakePHP 3.3 is an API compatible upgrade from 3.2. This page outlines the
changes and improvements made in 3.3.

Deprecations
============

* ``Router::mapResources()`` is deprecated. Use routing scopes and
  ``$routes->resources()`` instead.
* ``Router::redirect()`` is deprecated. Use routing scopes and
  ``$routes->redirect()`` instead.
* ``Router::parseNamedParams()`` is deprecated. Named parameter backwards
  compatibility will be removed in 4.0.0
* ``Cake\Http\Client\Response`` has had the following methods deprecated because they
  overlap with PSR7 interface methods:

  * ``statusCode()`` use ``getStatusCode()`` instead.
  * ``encoding()`` use ``getEncoding()`` instead.
  * ``header()`` use ``getHeaderLine()`` instead.
  * ``cookie()`` use ``getCookie()`` instead.
  * ``version()`` use ``getProtocolVersion()`` instead.
* Dispatcher Filters are now deprecated. Use :doc:`/controllers/middleware`
  instead.
* ``RequestActionTrait`` has been deprecated. Refactor your code to use
  :doc:`/views/cells` instead.
* ``Cake\\Utility\\Crypto\\Mcrypt`` engine has been deprecated as the ``mcrypt``
  extension is deprecated in PHP 7.1. Use the ``openssl`` and 
  :php:class:`Cake\\Utility\\Crypto\\Openssl` instead.

Behavior Changes
================

While these changes are API compatible, they represent minor variances in
behavior that may effect your application:

* The default JSON encode format for Date and DateTime instances is now
  ISO-8601. This means that the timezone value contains a ``:``.
  For example ``2015-11-06T00:00:00+03:00``
* ``Controller::referer()`` now consistently omits the application base path
  when generating application local URLs. Previously string URLs would have the
  base path prepended to them, while array URLs would not.
* The default ``ErrorController`` no longer disables ``Auth`` and ``Security``
  components, as it does not extend ``AppController``. If you are enabling these
  components through events, you will need to update your code.

PSR7 Middleware Support Added
=============================

In tandem with the deprecation of Dispatcher Filters, support for PSR7
middleware has been added. Middleware is part of the new HTTP stack that is an
opt-in component of CakePHP 3.3.0. By using the new HTTP stack, you can take
advantage of features like:

* Using middleware from plugins, and libraries outside of CakePHP.
* Leverage the same response object methods in both the responses you get from
  ``Http\Client`` and the responses your application generates.
* Be able to augment the response objects emitted by error handling and asset
  delivery.

See the :doc:`/controllers/middleware` chapter and :ref:`adding-http-stack`
sections for more information and how to add the new HTTP stack to an existing
application.

Http Client is now PSR7 Compatible
==================================

``Cake\Network\Http\Client`` has been moved to ``Cake\Http\Client``. Its request
and response objects now implement the
`PSR7 interfaces <http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/>`__. Several methods on
``Cake\Http\Client\Response`` are now deprecated, see above for more
information.

ORM Improvements
================

* Additional support has been added for mapping complex data types. This makes
  it easier to work with geo-spatial types, and data that cannot be represented
  by strings in SQL queries. See the
  :ref:`mapping-custom-datatypes-to-sql-expressions` for more information.
* A new ``JsonType`` was added. This new type lets you use the native JSON types
  available in MySQL and Postgres. In other database providers the ``json`` type
  will map to ``TEXT`` columns.
* ``Association::unique()`` was added. This method proxies the target table's
  ``unique()`` method, but ensures that association conditions are applied.
* ``isUnique`` rules now apply association conditions.
* When entities are converted into JSON, the associated objects are no longer
  converted to an array first using ``toArray()``. Instead, the
  ``jsonSerialize()`` method will be invoked on all associated entities. This
  gives you more flexibility and control on which properties are exposed in JSON
  representations of your entities.
* ``Table::newEntity()`` and ``Table::patchEntity()`` will now raise an
  exception when an unknown association is in the 'associated' key.
* ``RulesChecker::validCount()`` was added. This new method allows to apply
  rules to the number of associated records an entity has.
* The ``allowNullableNulls`` option was added to the ``existsIn`` rule. This
  option allows rules to pass when some columns are null.
* Saving translated records is now simpler. See the
  :ref:`saving-multiple-translations` for more information.

Multiple Pagination Support Added
=================================

You can now paginate multiple queries in a single controller action/view
template. See the :ref:`paginating-multiple-queries` section for more
details.

Cache Shell Added
=================

To help you better manage cached data from the CLI environment, a shell command
has been added that exposes methods for clearing cached data::

    // Clear one cache config
    bin/cake cache clear <configname>

    // Clear all cache configs
    bin/cake cache clear_all

FormHelper
==========

* FormHelper will now automatically set the default value of fields to the
  default value defined in your database columns. You can disable this behavior
  by setting ``schemaDefault`` option to false.

Validation
==========

* ``Validator::requirePresence()``, ``Validator::allowEmpty()`` and
  ``Validator::notEmpty()`` now accept a list of fields. This allows you
  to more concisely define the fields that are required.

StringTemplate
==============

``StringTemplate::format()`` now throws an exception instead of returning
``null`` when requested template is not found.

Other Enhancements
==================

* ``Collection::transpose()`` was added. This method allows you to tranpose the
  rows and columns of a matrix with equal length rows.
* The default ``ErrorController`` now loads ``RequestHandlerComponent`` to
  enable ``Accept`` header based content-type negotiation for error pages.

Routing
-------

* ``Router::parse()``, ``RouteCollection::parse()`` and ``Route::parse()`` had
  a ``$method`` argument added. It defaults to 'GET'. This new parameter reduces
  reliance on global state, and necessary for the PSR7 work integration to be
  done.
* When building resource routes, you can now define a prefix. This is useful
  when defining nested resources as you can create specialized controllers for
  nested resources.
* Dispatcher Filters are now deprecated. Use :doc:`/controllers/middleware`
  instead.

Console
-------

* Shell tasks that are invoked directly from the CLI no longer have their
  ``_welcome`` method invoked. They will also have the ``requested`` parameter
  set now.
* ``Shell::err()`` will now apply the 'error' style to text. The default
  styling is red text.

Request
-------

* ``Request::is()`` and ``Request::addDetector()`` now supports additional
  arguments in detectors. This allows detector callables to operate on
  additional parameters.

Debugging Functions
-------------------

* The ``pr()``, ``debug()``, and ``pj()`` functions now return the value being
  dumped. This makes them easier to use when values are being returned.

Commit message:

Add note about losing original values on save

en/appendices/3-3-migration-guide.rst, after:

3.3 Migration Guide
###################

CakePHP 3.3 is an API compatible upgrade from 3.2. This page outlines the
changes and improvements made in 3.3.

Deprecations
============

* ``Router::mapResources()`` is deprecated. Use routing scopes and
  ``$routes->resources()`` instead.
* ``Router::redirect()`` is deprecated. Use routing scopes and
  ``$routes->redirect()`` instead.
* ``Router::parseNamedParams()`` is deprecated. Named parameter backwards
  compatibility will be removed in 4.0.0
* ``Cake\Http\Client\Response`` has had the following methods deprecated because they
  overlap with PSR7 interface methods:

  * ``statusCode()`` use ``getStatusCode()`` instead.
  * ``encoding()`` use ``getEncoding()`` instead.
  * ``header()`` use ``getHeaderLine()`` instead.
  * ``cookie()`` use ``getCookie()`` instead.
  * ``version()`` use ``getProtocolVersion()`` instead.
* Dispatcher Filters are now deprecated. Use :doc:`/controllers/middleware`
  instead.
* ``RequestActionTrait`` has been deprecated. Refactor your code to use
  :doc:`/views/cells` instead.
* ``Cake\\Utility\\Crypto\\Mcrypt`` engine has been deprecated as the ``mcrypt``
  extension is deprecated in PHP 7.1. Use the ``openssl`` and 
  :php:class:`Cake\\Utility\\Crypto\\Openssl` instead.

Behavior Changes
================

While these changes are API compatible, they represent minor variances in
behavior that may effect your application:

* The default JSON encode format for Date and DateTime instances is now
  ISO-8601. This means that the timezone value contains a ``:``.
  For example ``2015-11-06T00:00:00+03:00``
* ``Controller::referer()`` now consistently omits the application base path
  when generating application local URLs. Previously string URLs would have the
  base path prepended to them, while array URLs would not.
* The default ``ErrorController`` no longer disables ``Auth`` and ``Security``
  components, as it does not extend ``AppController``. If you are enabling these
  components through events, you will need to update your code.
* ``Entity::clean`` now cleans original values, clearing them on save. This
  behavior was a bug, as the entity's original state should not persist a
  save but instead reflect the new state of the entity.

PSR7 Middleware Support Added
=============================

In tandem with the deprecation of Dispatcher Filters, support for PSR7
middleware has been added. Middleware is part of the new HTTP stack that is an
opt-in component of CakePHP 3.3.0. By using the new HTTP stack, you can take
advantage of features like:

* Using middleware from plugins, and libraries outside of CakePHP.
* Leverage the same response object methods in both the responses you get from
  ``Http\Client`` and the responses your application generates.
* Be able to augment the response objects emitted by error handling and asset
  delivery.

See the :doc:`/controllers/middleware` chapter and :ref:`adding-http-stack`
sections for more information and how to add the new HTTP stack to an existing
application.

Http Client is now PSR7 Compatible
==================================

``Cake\Network\Http\Client`` has been moved to ``Cake\Http\Client``. Its request
and response objects now implement the
`PSR7 interfaces <http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/>`__. Several methods on
``Cake\Http\Client\Response`` are now deprecated, see above for more
information.

ORM Improvements
================

* Additional support has been added for mapping complex data types. This makes
  it easier to work with geo-spatial types, and data that cannot be represented
  by strings in SQL queries. See the
  :ref:`mapping-custom-datatypes-to-sql-expressions` for more information.
* A new ``JsonType`` was added. This new type lets you use the native JSON types
  available in MySQL and Postgres. In other database providers the ``json`` type
  will map to ``TEXT`` columns.
* ``Association::unique()`` was added. This method proxies the target table's
  ``unique()`` method, but ensures that association conditions are applied.
* ``isUnique`` rules now apply association conditions.
* When entities are converted into JSON, the associated objects are no longer
  converted to an array first using ``toArray()``. Instead, the
  ``jsonSerialize()`` method will be invoked on all associated entities. This
  gives you more flexibility and control on which properties are exposed in JSON
  representations of your entities.
* ``Table::newEntity()`` and ``Table::patchEntity()`` will now raise an
  exception when an unknown association is in the 'associated' key.
* ``RulesChecker::validCount()`` was added. This new method allows to apply
  rules to the number of associated records an entity has.
* The ``allowNullableNulls`` option was added to the ``existsIn`` rule. This
  option allows rules to pass when some columns are null.
* Saving translated records is now simpler. See the
  :ref:`saving-multiple-translations` for more information.

Multiple Pagination Support Added
=================================

You can now paginate multiple queries in a single controller action/view
template. See the :ref:`paginating-multiple-queries` section for more
details.

Cache Shell Added
=================

To help you better manage cached data from the CLI environment, a shell command
has been added that exposes methods for clearing cached data::

    // Clear one cache config
    bin/cake cache clear <configname>

    // Clear all cache configs
    bin/cake cache clear_all

FormHelper
==========

* FormHelper will now automatically set the default value of fields to the
  default value defined in your database columns. You can disable this behavior
  by setting ``schemaDefault`` option to false.

Validation
==========

* ``Validator::requirePresence()``, ``Validator::allowEmpty()`` and
  ``Validator::notEmpty()`` now accept a list of fields. This allows you
  to more concisely define the fields that are required.

StringTemplate
==============

``StringTemplate::format()`` now throws an exception instead of returning
``null`` when requested template is not found.

Other Enhancements
==================

* ``Collection::transpose()`` was added. This method allows you to tranpose the
  rows and columns of a matrix with equal length rows.
* The default ``ErrorController`` now loads ``RequestHandlerComponent`` to
  enable ``Accept`` header based content-type negotiation for error pages.

Routing
-------

* ``Router::parse()``, ``RouteCollection::parse()`` and ``Route::parse()`` had
  a ``$method`` argument added. It defaults to 'GET'. This new parameter reduces
  reliance on global state, and necessary for the PSR7 work integration to be
  done.
* When building resource routes, you can now define a prefix. This is useful
  when defining nested resources as you can create specialized controllers for
  nested resources.
* Dispatcher Filters are now deprecated. Use :doc:`/controllers/middleware`
  instead.

Console
-------

* Shell tasks that are invoked directly from the CLI no longer have their
  ``_welcome`` method invoked. They will also have the ``requested`` parameter
  set now.
* ``Shell::err()`` will now apply the 'error' style to text. The default
  styling is red text.

Request
-------

* ``Request::is()`` and ``Request::addDetector()`` now supports additional
  arguments in detectors. This allows detector callables to operate on
  additional parameters.

Debugging Functions
-------------------

* The ``pr()``, ``debug()``, and ``pj()`` functions now return the value being
  dumped. This makes them easier to use when values are being returned.
