en/views/helpers/flash.rst, before:

Flash
#####

.. php:namespace:: Cake\View\Helper

.. php:class:: FlashHelper(View $view, array $config = [])

FlashHelper provides a way to render flash messages that were set in
``$_SESSION`` by :doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>`.
:doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>` and FlashHelper
primarily use elements to render flash messages.  Flash elements are found under
the **src/Template/Element/Flash** directory.  You'll notice that CakePHP's App
template comes with two flash elements: **success.ctp** and **error.ctp**.

Rendering Flash Messages
========================

To render a flash message, you can simply use FlashHelper's ``render()``
method::

    <?= $this->Flash->render() ?>

By default, CakePHP uses a "flash" key for flash messages in a session.  But, if
you've specified a key when setting the flash message in
:doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>`, you can specify which
flash key to render::

    <?= $this->Flash->render('other') ?>

You can also override any of the options that were set in FlashComponent::

    // In your Controller
    $this->Flash->set('The user has been saved.', [
        'element' => 'success'
    ]);

    // In your View: Will use great_success.ctp instead of succcess.ctp
    <?= $this->Flash->render('flash', [
        'element' => 'great_success'
    ]);

.. note::

    By default, CakePHP does not escape the HTML in flash messages. If you are
    using any request or user data in your flash messages, you should escape it
    with :php:func:`h` when formatting your messages.

.. versionadded:: 3.1

    The :doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>` now
    stacks messages. If you set multiple flash messages, when you call
    ``render()``, each message will be rendered in its own elements, in the
    order they were set.

For more information about the available array options, please refer to the
:doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>` section.

Routing Prefix and Flash Messages
=================================

.. versionadded:: 3.0.1

If you have a Routing prefix configured, you can now have your Flash elements
stored in **src/Template/{Prefix}/Element/Flash**. This way, you can have
specific messages layouts for each part of your application (for instance, have
different layouts for your front-end and your admin side).

Flash Messages and Themes
=========================

The FlashHelper uses normal elements to render the messages and will therefore
obey any theme you might have specified. So when your theme has a
**src/Template/Element/Flash/error.ctp** file it will be used, just as with any
Elements and Views.

Commit message:

Clarify where/how escaping is done in flash templates.
Refs #4483

en/views/helpers/flash.rst, after:

Flash
#####

.. php:namespace:: Cake\View\Helper

.. php:class:: FlashHelper(View $view, array $config = [])

FlashHelper provides a way to render flash messages that were set in
``$_SESSION`` by :doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>`.
:doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>` and FlashHelper
primarily use elements to render flash messages.  Flash elements are found under
the **src/Template/Element/Flash** directory.  You'll notice that CakePHP's App
template comes with two flash elements: **success.ctp** and **error.ctp**.

Rendering Flash Messages
========================

To render a flash message, you can simply use FlashHelper's ``render()``
method::

    <?= $this->Flash->render() ?>

By default, CakePHP uses a "flash" key for flash messages in a session.  But, if
you've specified a key when setting the flash message in
:doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>`, you can specify which
flash key to render::

    <?= $this->Flash->render('other') ?>

You can also override any of the options that were set in FlashComponent::

    // In your Controller
    $this->Flash->set('The user has been saved.', [
        'element' => 'success'
    ]);

    // In your View: Will use great_success.ctp instead of succcess.ctp
    <?= $this->Flash->render('flash', [
        'element' => 'great_success'
    ]);

.. note::

    When building custom flash message templates, be sure to properly HTML
    encode any user data. CakePHP won't escape flash message parameters for you.

.. versionadded:: 3.1

    The :doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>` now
    stacks messages. If you set multiple flash messages, when you call
    ``render()``, each message will be rendered in its own elements, in the
    order they were set.

For more information about the available array options, please refer to the
:doc:`FlashComponent </controllers/components/flash>` section.

Routing Prefix and Flash Messages
=================================

.. versionadded:: 3.0.1

If you have a Routing prefix configured, you can now have your Flash elements
stored in **src/Template/{Prefix}/Element/Flash**. This way, you can have
specific messages layouts for each part of your application (for instance, have
different layouts for your front-end and your admin side).

Flash Messages and Themes
=========================

The FlashHelper uses normal elements to render the messages and will therefore
obey any theme you might have specified. So when your theme has a
**src/Template/Element/Flash/error.ctp** file it will be used, just as with any
Elements and Views.
