en/views/helpers/url.rst, before:

Url
###

.. php:namespace:: Cake\View\Helper

.. php:class:: UrlHelper(View $view, array $config = [])

The UrlHelper makes it easy for you to generate URL's from your other helpers.
It also gives you a single place to customize how URLs are generated by
overriding the core helper with an application one. See the
:ref:`aliasing-helpers` section for how to do this.

Generating URLs
===============

.. php:method:: build(mixed $url = null, boolean $full = false)

Returns a URL pointing to a combination of controller and action.
If ``$url`` is empty, it returns the ``REQUEST\_URI``, otherwise it
generates the URL for the controller and action combo. If ``full`` is
``true``, the full base URL will be prepended to the result::

    echo $this->Url->build([
        "controller" => "Posts",
        "action" => "view",
        "bar"
    ]);

    // Output
    /posts/view/bar

Here are a few more usage examples:

URL with extension::

    echo $this->Url->build([
        "controller" => "Posts",
        "action" => "list",
        "_ext" => "rss"
    ]);

    // Output
    /posts/list.rss

URL (starting with '/') with the full base URL prepended::

    echo $this->Url->build('/posts', true);

    // Output
    http://somedomain.com/posts

URL with GET params and fragment anchor::

    echo $this->Url->build([
        "controller" => "Posts",
        "action" => "search",
        "?" => ["foo" => "bar"],
        "#" => "first"
    ]);

    // Output
    /posts/search?foo=bar#first

The above example uses the ``?`` key which is useful when you want to be
explicit about the query string parameters you are using, or if you want a query
string parameter that shares a name with one of your route placeholders.

URL for named route::

    echo $this->Url->build(['_name' => 'product-page', 'slug' => 'i-m-slug']);

    // Assuming route is setup like:
    // $router->connect(
    //     '/products/:slug',
    //     [
    //         'controller' => 'Products',
    //         'action' => 'view'
    //     ],
    //     [
    //         '_name' => 'product-page'
    //     ]
    // );
    /products/i-m-slug

If you are generating URLs for CSS, Javascript or image files there are helper
methods for each of these asset types::

    // Outputs /img/icon.png
    $this->Url->image('icon.png');

    // Outputs /js/app.js
    $this->Url->script('app.js');

    // Outputs /css/app.css
    $this->Url->css('app.css');

.. versionadded:: 3.2.4
    The asset helper methods were added in 3.2.4.

For further information check
`Router::url <http://api.cakephp.org/3.0/class-Cake.Routing.Router.html#_url>`_
in the API.

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: UrlHelper
    :description lang=en: The role of the UrlHelper in CakePHP is to help build urls.
    :keywords lang=en: url helper,url

Commit message:

Document Url::build() options array

en/views/helpers/url.rst, after:

Url
###

.. php:namespace:: Cake\View\Helper

.. php:class:: UrlHelper(View $view, array $config = [])

The UrlHelper makes it easy for you to generate URL's from your other helpers.
It also gives you a single place to customize how URLs are generated by
overriding the core helper with an application one. See the
:ref:`aliasing-helpers` section for how to do this.

Generating URLs
===============

.. php:method:: build(mixed $url = null, boolean $full = false)

Returns a URL pointing to a combination of controller and action.
If ``$url`` is empty, it returns the ``REQUEST\_URI``, otherwise it
generates the URL for the controller and action combo. If ``full`` is
``true``, the full base URL will be prepended to the result::

    echo $this->Url->build([
        "controller" => "Posts",
        "action" => "view",
        "bar"
    ]);

    // Output
    /posts/view/bar

Here are a few more usage examples:

URL with extension::

    echo $this->Url->build([
        "controller" => "Posts",
        "action" => "list",
        "_ext" => "rss"
    ]);

    // Output
    /posts/list.rss

URL (starting with '/') with the full base URL prepended::

    echo $this->Url->build('/posts', true);

    // Output
    http://somedomain.com/posts

URL with GET params and fragment anchor::

    echo $this->Url->build([
        "controller" => "Posts",
        "action" => "search",
        "?" => ["foo" => "bar"],
        "#" => "first"
    ]);

    // Output
    /posts/search?foo=bar#first

The above example uses the ``?`` key which is useful when you want to be
explicit about the query string parameters you are using, or if you want a query
string parameter that shares a name with one of your route placeholders.

URL for named route::

    echo $this->Url->build(['_name' => 'product-page', 'slug' => 'i-m-slug']);

    // Assuming route is setup like:
    // $router->connect(
    //     '/products/:slug',
    //     [
    //         'controller' => 'Products',
    //         'action' => 'view'
    //     ],
    //     [
    //         '_name' => 'product-page'
    //     ]
    // );
    /products/i-m-slug

.. versionadded:: 3.3.5
The ``url()`` method now allows an array as second argument defining options::

    $this->Url->build('/posts', [
        'escape' => false.
        'fullBase' => true
    ]);

This allows for disabling espacing the URL now, for example.

If you are generating URLs for CSS, Javascript or image files there are helper
methods for each of these asset types::

    // Outputs /img/icon.png
    $this->Url->image('icon.png');

    // Outputs /js/app.js
    $this->Url->script('app.js');

    // Outputs /css/app.css
    $this->Url->css('app.css');

.. versionadded:: 3.2.4
    The asset helper methods were added in 3.2.4.

For further information check
`Router::url <http://api.cakephp.org/3.0/class-Cake.Routing.Router.html#_url>`_
in the API.

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: UrlHelper
    :description lang=en: The role of the UrlHelper in CakePHP is to help build urls.
    :keywords lang=en: url helper,url
