Debugging
#########

Debugging is an inevitable and necessary part of any development
cycle. While CakePHP doesn't offer any tools that directly connect
with any IDE or editor, CakePHP does provide several tools to
assist in debugging and exposing what is running under the hood of
your application.

Basic Debugging
===============

.. php:function:: debug(mixed $var, boolean $showHtml = null, $showFrom = true)
    :noindex:

The ``debug()`` function is a globally available function that works
similarly to the PHP function ``print_r()``. The ``debug()`` function
allows you to show the contents of a variable in a number of
different ways. First, if you'd like data to be shown in an
HTML-friendly way, set the second parameter to ``true``. The function
also prints out the line and file it is originating from by
default.

Output from this function is only shown if the core ``$debug`` variable
has been set to ``true``.

.. php:function:: stackTrace()

The ``stackTrace()`` function is available globally, and allows you to output
a stack trace wherever the function is called.

.. php:function:: breakpoint()

.. versionadded:: 3.1

If you have `Psysh <http://psysh.org/>`_ installed you can use this
function in CLI enviroments to open an interactive console with the current
local scope::

    // Some code
    eval(breakpoint());

Will open an interactive console that can be used to check local variables
and execute other code. You can exit the interactive debugger and resume the
original execution by running ``quit`` or ``q`` in the interactive session.

Using the Debugger Class
========================

.. php:namespace:: Cake\Error

.. php:class:: Debugger

To use the debugger, first ensure that ``Configure::read('debug')`` is
set to ``true``.

Outputting Values
=================

.. php:staticmethod:: dump($var, $depth = 3)

Dump prints out the contents of a variable. It will print out all
properties and methods (if any) of the supplied variable::

    $foo = [1,2,3];

    Debugger::dump($foo);

    // Outputs
    array(
        1,
        2,
        3
    )

    // Simple object
    $car = new Car();

    Debugger::dump($car);

    // Outputs
    object(Car) {
        color => 'red'
        make => 'Toyota'
        model => 'Camry'
        mileage => (int)15000
    }

Logging With Stack Traces
=========================

.. php:staticmethod:: log($var, $level = 7, $depth = 3)

Creates a detailed stack trace log at the time of invocation. The
``log()`` method prints out data similar to that done by
``Debugger::dump()``, but to the debug.log instead of the output
buffer. Note your **tmp** directory (and its contents) must be
writable by the web server for ``log()`` to work correctly.

Generating Stack Traces
=======================

.. php:staticmethod:: trace($options)

Returns the current stack trace. Each line of the trace includes
the calling method, including which file and line the call
originated from::

    // In PostsController::index()
    pr(Debugger::trace());

    // Outputs
    PostsController::index() - APP/Controller/DownloadsController.php, line 48
    Dispatcher::_invoke() - CORE/src/Routing/Dispatcher.php, line 265
    Dispatcher::dispatch() - CORE/src/Routing/Dispatcher.php, line 237
    [main] - APP/webroot/index.php, line 84

Above is the stack trace generated by calling ``Debugger::trace()`` in
a controller action. Reading the stack trace bottom to top shows
the order of currently running functions (stack frames).

Getting an Excerpt From a File
==============================

.. php:staticmethod:: excerpt($file, $line, $context)

Grab an excerpt from the file at $path (which is an absolute
filepath), highlights line number $line with $context number of
lines around it. ::

    pr(Debugger::excerpt(ROOT . DS . LIBS . 'debugger.php', 321, 2));

    // Will output the following.
    Array
    (
        [0] => <code><span style="color: #000000"> * @access public</span></code>
        [1] => <code><span style="color: #000000"> */</span></code>
        [2] => <code><span style="color: #000000">    function excerpt($file, $line, $context = 2) {</span></code>

        [3] => <span class="code-highlight"><code><span style="color: #000000">        $data = $lines = array();</span></code></span>
        [4] => <code><span style="color: #000000">        $data = @explode("\n", file_get_contents($file));</span></code>
    )

Although this method is used internally, it can be handy if you're
creating your own error messages or log entries for custom
situations.

.. php:staticmethod:: Debugger::getType($var)

Get the type of a variable. Objects will return their class name


Using Logging to Debug
======================

Logging messages is another good way to debug applications, and you can use
:php:class:`Cake\\Log\\Log` to do logging in your application. All objects that
use ``LogTrait`` have an instance method ``log()`` which can be used
to log messages::

    $this->log('Got here', 'debug');

The above would write ``Got here`` into the debug log. You can use log entries
to help debug methods that involve redirects or complicated loops. You can also
use :php:meth:`Cake\\Log\\Log::write()` to write log messages. This method can be called
statically anywhere in your application one CakeLog has been loaded::

    // At the top of the file you want to log in.
    use Cake\Log\Log;

    // Anywhere that Log has been imported.
    Log::debug('Got here');

Debug Kit
=========

DebugKit is a plugin that provides a number of good debugging tools. It
primarily provides a toolbar in the rendered HTML, that provides a plethora of
information about your application and the current request. See the
:doc:`/debug-kit` chapter for how to install and use DebugKit.

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Debugging
    :description lang=en: Debugging CakePHP with the Debugger class, logging, basic debugging and using the DebugKit plugin.
    :keywords lang=en: code excerpt,stack trace,default output,error link,default error,web requests,error report,debugger,arrays,different ways,excerpt from,cakephp,ide,options
