en/contributing/documentation.rst, before:

Documentation
#############

Contributing to the documentation is simple. The files are hosted on
https://github.com/cakephp/docs. Feel free to fork the repo, add your
changes/improvements/translations and give back by issuing a pull request.
You can even edit the docs online with GitHub, without ever downloading the
files -- the "Improve this Doc" button on any given page will direct you to
GitHub's online editor for that page.

CakePHP documentation is
`continuously integrated <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration>`_,
so you can check the status of the `various builds <http://ci.cakephp.org>`_
on the Jenkins server at any time.

Translations
============

Email the docs team (docs at cakephp dot org) or hop on IRC
(#cakephp on freenode) to discuss any translation efforts you would
like to participate in.

New Translation Language
------------------------

We want to provide translations that are as complete as possible. However, there
may be times where a translation file is not up-to-date. You should always
consider the English version as the authoritative version.

If your language is not in the current languages, please contact us through
Github and we will consider creating a skeleton folder for it. The following
sections are the first one you should consider translating as these
files don't change often:

- index.rst
- intro.rst
- quickstart.rst
- installation.rst
- /intro folder
- /tutorials-and-examples folder

Reminder for Docs Administrators
--------------------------------

The structure of all language folders should mirror the English folder
structure. If the structure changes for the English version, we should apply
those changes in the other languages.

For example, if a new English file is created in **en/file.rst**, we should:

- Add the file in all other languages : **fr/file.rst**, **zh/file.rst**, ...
- Delete the content, but keeping the ``title``, ``meta`` information and
  eventual ``toc-tree`` elements. The following note will be added while nobody
  has translated the file::

    File Title
    ##########

    .. note::
        The documentation is not currently supported in XX language for this
        page.

        Please feel free to send us a pull request on
        `Github <https://github.com/cakephp/docs>`_ or use the **Improve This Doc**
        button to directly propose your changes.

        You can refer to the English version in the select top menu to have
        information about this page's topic.

    // If toc-tree elements are in the English version
    .. toctree::
        :maxdepth: 1

        one-toc-file
        other-toc-file

    .. meta::
        :title lang=xx: File Title
        :keywords lang=xx: title, description,...


Translator tips
---------------

- Browse and edit in the language you want the content to be
  translated to - otherwise you won't see what has already been
  translated.
- Feel free to dive right in if your chosen language already
  exists on the book.
- Use `Informal Form <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Register_(linguistics)>`_.
- Translate both the content and the title at the same time.
- Do compare to the English content before submitting a correction
  (if you correct something, but don't integrate an 'upstream' change
  your submission won't be accepted).
- If you need to write an English term, wrap it in ``<em>`` tags.
  E.g. "asdf asdf *Controller* asdf" or "asdf asdf Kontroller
  (*Controller*) asfd" as appropriate.
- Do not submit partial translations.
- Do not edit a section with a pending change.
- Do not use
  `HTML entities <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_XML_and_HTML_character_entity_references>`_
  for accented characters, the book uses UTF-8.
- Do not significantly change the markup (HTML) or add new content.
- If the original content is missing some info, submit an edit for
  that first.

Documentation Formatting Guide
==============================

The new CakePHP documentation is written with
`ReST formatted text <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText>`_. ReST
(Re Structured Text) is a plain text markup syntax similar to markdown, or
textile. To maintain consistency it is recommended that when adding to the
CakePHP documentation you follow the guidelines here on how to format and
structure your text.

Line Length
-----------

Lines of text should be wrapped at 80 columns. The only exception should be
long URLs, and code snippets.

Headings and Sections
---------------------

Section headers are created by underlining the title with punctuation characters
at least the length of the text.

- ``#`` Is used to denote page titles.
- ``=`` Is used for sections in a page.
- ``-`` Is used for subsections.
- ``~`` Is used for sub-subsections.
- ``^`` Is used for sub-sub-subsections.

Headings should not be nested more than 5 levels deep. Headings should be
preceded and followed by a blank line.

Paragraphs
----------

Paragraphs are simply blocks of text, with all the lines at the same level of
indentation. Paragraphs should be separated by more than one empty line.

Inline Markup
-------------

* One asterisk: *text* for emphasis (italics)
  We'll use it for general highlighting/emphasis.

  * ``*text*``.

* Two asterisks: **text** for strong emphasis (boldface)
  We'll use it for working directories, bullet list subject, table names and
  excluding the following word "table".

  * ``**/config/Migrations**``, ``**articles**``, etc.

* Two backquotes: ``text`` for code samples
  We'll use it for names of method options, names of table columns, object
  names, excluding the following word "object" and for method/function
  names -- include "()".

  * ````cascadeCallbacks````, ````true````, ````id````,
    ````PagesController````, ````config()````, etc.

If asterisks or backquotes appear in running text and could be confused with
inline markup delimiters, they have to be escaped with a backslash.

Inline markup has a few restrictions:

* It **may not** be nested.
* Content may not start or end with whitespace: ``* text*`` is wrong.
* Content must be separated from surrounding text by non-word characters. Use a
  backslash escaped space to work around that: ``onelong\ *bolded*\ word``.

Lists
-----

List markup is very similar to markdown. Unordered lists are indicated by
starting a line with a single asterisk and a space. Numbered lists can be
created with either numerals, or ``#`` for auto numbering::

    * This is a bullet
    * So is this. But this line
      has two lines.

    1. First line
    2. Second line

    #. Automatic numbering
    #. Will save you some time.

Indented lists can also be created, by indenting sections and separating them
with an empty line::

    * First line
    * Second line

        * Going deeper
        * Whoah

    * Back to the first level.

Definition lists can be created by doing the following::

    term
        definition
    CakePHP
        An MVC framework for PHP

Terms cannot be more than one line, but definitions can be multi-line and all
lines should be indented consistently.

Links
-----

There are several kinds of links, each with their own uses.

External Links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Links to external documents can be done with the following::

    `External Link to php.net <http://php.net>`_

The resulting link would look like this: `External Link to php.net <http://php.net>`_

Links to Other Pages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rst:role:: doc

    Other pages in the documentation can be linked to using the ``:doc:`` role.
    You can link to the specified document using either an absolute or relative
    path reference. You should omit the ``.rst`` extension. For example, if
    the reference ``:doc:`form``` appears in the document ``core-helpers/html``,
    then the link references ``core-helpers/form``. If the reference was
    ``:doc:`/core-helpers```, it would always reference ``/core-helpers``
    regardless of where it was used.

Cross Referencing Links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rst:role:: ref

    You can cross reference any arbitrary title in any document using the
    ``:ref:`` role. Link label targets must be unique across the entire
    documentation. When creating labels for class methods, it's best to use
    ``class-method`` as the format for your link label.

    The most common use of labels is above a title. Example::

        .. _label-name:

        Section heading
        ---------------

        More content here.

    Elsewhere you could reference the above section using ``:ref:`label-name```.
    The link's text would be the title that the link preceded. You can also
    provide custom link text using ``:ref:`Link text <label-name>```.

Prevent Sphinx to Output Warnings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sphinx will output warnings if a file is not referenced in a toc-tree. It's
a great way to ensure that all files have a link directed to them, but
sometimes, you don't need to insert a link for a file, eg. for our
`epub-contents` and `pdf-contents` files. In those cases, you can add
``:orphan:`` at the top of the file, to suppress warnings that the file is not
in the toc-tree.

Describing Classes and their Contents
-------------------------------------

The CakePHP documentation uses the `phpdomain
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/sphinxcontrib-phpdomain>`_ to provide custom
directives for describing PHP objects and constructs. Using these directives
and roles is required to give proper indexing and cross referencing features.

Describing Classes and Constructs
---------------------------------

Each directive populates the index, and or the namespace index.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:global:: name

   This directive declares a new PHP global variable.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:function:: name(signature)

   Defines a new global function outside of a class.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:const:: name

   This directive declares a new PHP constant, you can also use it nested
   inside a class directive to create class constants.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:exception:: name

   This directive declares a new Exception in the current namespace. The
   signature can include constructor arguments.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:class:: name

   Describes a class. Methods, attributes, and constants belonging to the class
   should be inside this directive's body::

        .. php:class:: MyClass

            Class description

           .. php:method:: method($argument)

           Method description


   Attributes, methods and constants don't need to be nested. They can also just
   follow the class declaration::

        .. php:class:: MyClass

            Text about the class

        .. php:method:: methodName()

            Text about the method


   .. seealso:: :rst:dir:`php:method`, :rst:dir:`php:attr`, :rst:dir:`php:const`

.. rst:directive:: .. php:method:: name(signature)

   Describe a class method, its arguments, return value, and exceptions::

        .. php:method:: instanceMethod($one, $two)

            :param string $one: The first parameter.
            :param string $two: The second parameter.
            :returns: An array of stuff.
            :throws: InvalidArgumentException

           This is an instance method.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:staticmethod:: ClassName::methodName(signature)

    Describe a static method, its arguments, return value and exceptions,
    see :rst:dir:`php:method` for options.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:attr:: name

   Describe an property/attribute on a class.

Prevent Sphinx to Output Warnings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sphinx will output warnings if a function is referenced in multiple files. It's
a great way to ensure that you did not add a function two times, but
sometimes, you actually want to write a function in two or more files, eg.
`debug object` is referenced in `/development/debugging` and in
`/core-libraries/global-constants-and-functions`. In this case, you can add
``:noindex:`` under the function debug to suppress warnings. Keep only
one reference **without** ``:no-index:`` to still have the function referenced::

    .. php:function:: debug(mixed $var, boolean $showHtml = null, $showFrom = true)
        :noindex:

Cross Referencing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following roles refer to PHP objects and links are generated if a
matching directive is found:

.. rst:role:: php:func

   Reference a PHP function.

.. rst:role:: php:global

   Reference a global variable whose name has ``$`` prefix.

.. rst:role:: php:const

   Reference either a global constant, or a class constant. Class constants
   should be preceded by the owning class::

        DateTime has an :php:const:`DateTime::ATOM` constant.

.. rst:role:: php:class

   Reference a class by name::

     :php:class:`ClassName`

.. rst:role:: php:meth

   Reference a method of a class. This role supports both kinds of methods::

     :php:meth:`DateTime::setDate`
     :php:meth:`Classname::staticMethod`

.. rst:role:: php:attr

   Reference a property on an object::

      :php:attr:`ClassName::$propertyName`

.. rst:role:: php:exc

   Reference an exception.


Source Code
-----------

Literal code blocks are created by ending a paragraph with ``::``. The literal
block must be indented, and like all paragraphs be separated by single lines::

    This is a paragraph::

        while ($i--) {
            doStuff()
        }

    This is regular text again.

Literal text is not modified or formatted, save that one level of indentation
is removed.


Notes and Warnings
------------------

There are often times when you want to inform the reader of an important tip,
special note or a potential hazard. Admonitions in sphinx are used for just
that. There are fives kinds of admonitions.

* ``.. tip::`` Tips are used to document or re-iterate interesting or important
  information. The content of the directive should be written in complete
  sentences and include all appropriate punctuation.
* ``.. note::`` Notes are used to document an especially important piece of
  information. The content of the directive should be written in complete
  sentences and include all appropriate punctuation.
* ``.. warning::`` Warnings are used to document potential stumbling blocks, or
  information pertaining to security. The content of the directive should be
  written in complete sentences and include all appropriate punctuation.
* ``.. versionadded:: X.Y.Z`` "Version added" admonitions are used to display notes
  specific to new features added at a specific version, ``X.Y.Z`` being the version on
  which the said feature was added.
* ``.. deprecated:: X.Y.Z`` As opposed to "version added" admonitions, "deprecated"
  admonition are used to notify of a deprecated feature, ``X.Y.Z`` being the version on
  which the said feature was deprecated.

All admonitions are made the same::

    .. note::

        Indented and preceded and followed by a blank line. Just like a
        paragraph.

    This text is not part of the note.

Samples
~~~~~~~

.. tip::

    This is a helpful tid-bit you probably forgot.

.. note::

    You should pay attention here.

.. warning::

    It could be dangerous.

.. versionadded:: 2.6.3

    This awesome feature was added on version 2.6.3

.. deprecated:: 2.6.3

    This old feature was deprecated on version 2.6.3


.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Documentation
    :keywords lang=en: partial translations,translation efforts,html entities,text markup,asfd,asdf,structured text,english content,markdown,formatted text,dot org,repo,consistency,translator,freenode,textile,improvements,syntax,cakephp,submission

Commit message:

Remove links to jenkins
I don't think there is much value in exposing our jenkins server to the
world so I'm removing it from here.

Refs #4555

en/contributing/documentation.rst, after:

Documentation
#############

Contributing to the documentation is simple. The files are hosted on
https://github.com/cakephp/docs. Feel free to fork the repo, add your
changes/improvements/translations and give back by issuing a pull request.
You can even edit the docs online with GitHub, without ever downloading the
files -- the "Improve this Doc" button on any given page will direct you to
GitHub's online editor for that page.

CakePHP documentation is
`continuously integrated <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration>`_,
and deployed after each pull request is merged.

Translations
============

Email the docs team (docs at cakephp dot org) or hop on IRC
(#cakephp on freenode) to discuss any translation efforts you would
like to participate in.

New Translation Language
------------------------

We want to provide translations that are as complete as possible. However, there
may be times where a translation file is not up-to-date. You should always
consider the English version as the authoritative version.

If your language is not in the current languages, please contact us through
Github and we will consider creating a skeleton folder for it. The following
sections are the first one you should consider translating as these
files don't change often:

- index.rst
- intro.rst
- quickstart.rst
- installation.rst
- /intro folder
- /tutorials-and-examples folder

Reminder for Docs Administrators
--------------------------------

The structure of all language folders should mirror the English folder
structure. If the structure changes for the English version, we should apply
those changes in the other languages.

For example, if a new English file is created in **en/file.rst**, we should:

- Add the file in all other languages : **fr/file.rst**, **zh/file.rst**, ...
- Delete the content, but keeping the ``title``, ``meta`` information and
  eventual ``toc-tree`` elements. The following note will be added while nobody
  has translated the file::

    File Title
    ##########

    .. note::
        The documentation is not currently supported in XX language for this
        page.

        Please feel free to send us a pull request on
        `Github <https://github.com/cakephp/docs>`_ or use the **Improve This Doc**
        button to directly propose your changes.

        You can refer to the English version in the select top menu to have
        information about this page's topic.

    // If toc-tree elements are in the English version
    .. toctree::
        :maxdepth: 1

        one-toc-file
        other-toc-file

    .. meta::
        :title lang=xx: File Title
        :keywords lang=xx: title, description,...


Translator tips
---------------

- Browse and edit in the language you want the content to be
  translated to - otherwise you won't see what has already been
  translated.
- Feel free to dive right in if your chosen language already
  exists on the book.
- Use `Informal Form <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Register_(linguistics)>`_.
- Translate both the content and the title at the same time.
- Do compare to the English content before submitting a correction
  (if you correct something, but don't integrate an 'upstream' change
  your submission won't be accepted).
- If you need to write an English term, wrap it in ``<em>`` tags.
  E.g. "asdf asdf *Controller* asdf" or "asdf asdf Kontroller
  (*Controller*) asfd" as appropriate.
- Do not submit partial translations.
- Do not edit a section with a pending change.
- Do not use
  `HTML entities <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_XML_and_HTML_character_entity_references>`_
  for accented characters, the book uses UTF-8.
- Do not significantly change the markup (HTML) or add new content.
- If the original content is missing some info, submit an edit for
  that first.

Documentation Formatting Guide
==============================

The new CakePHP documentation is written with
`ReST formatted text <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText>`_. ReST
(Re Structured Text) is a plain text markup syntax similar to markdown, or
textile. To maintain consistency it is recommended that when adding to the
CakePHP documentation you follow the guidelines here on how to format and
structure your text.

Line Length
-----------

Lines of text should be wrapped at 80 columns. The only exception should be
long URLs, and code snippets.

Headings and Sections
---------------------

Section headers are created by underlining the title with punctuation characters
at least the length of the text.

- ``#`` Is used to denote page titles.
- ``=`` Is used for sections in a page.
- ``-`` Is used for subsections.
- ``~`` Is used for sub-subsections.
- ``^`` Is used for sub-sub-subsections.

Headings should not be nested more than 5 levels deep. Headings should be
preceded and followed by a blank line.

Paragraphs
----------

Paragraphs are simply blocks of text, with all the lines at the same level of
indentation. Paragraphs should be separated by more than one empty line.

Inline Markup
-------------

* One asterisk: *text* for emphasis (italics)
  We'll use it for general highlighting/emphasis.

  * ``*text*``.

* Two asterisks: **text** for strong emphasis (boldface)
  We'll use it for working directories, bullet list subject, table names and
  excluding the following word "table".

  * ``**/config/Migrations**``, ``**articles**``, etc.

* Two backquotes: ``text`` for code samples
  We'll use it for names of method options, names of table columns, object
  names, excluding the following word "object" and for method/function
  names -- include "()".

  * ````cascadeCallbacks````, ````true````, ````id````,
    ````PagesController````, ````config()````, etc.

If asterisks or backquotes appear in running text and could be confused with
inline markup delimiters, they have to be escaped with a backslash.

Inline markup has a few restrictions:

* It **may not** be nested.
* Content may not start or end with whitespace: ``* text*`` is wrong.
* Content must be separated from surrounding text by non-word characters. Use a
  backslash escaped space to work around that: ``onelong\ *bolded*\ word``.

Lists
-----

List markup is very similar to markdown. Unordered lists are indicated by
starting a line with a single asterisk and a space. Numbered lists can be
created with either numerals, or ``#`` for auto numbering::

    * This is a bullet
    * So is this. But this line
      has two lines.

    1. First line
    2. Second line

    #. Automatic numbering
    #. Will save you some time.

Indented lists can also be created, by indenting sections and separating them
with an empty line::

    * First line
    * Second line

        * Going deeper
        * Whoah

    * Back to the first level.

Definition lists can be created by doing the following::

    term
        definition
    CakePHP
        An MVC framework for PHP

Terms cannot be more than one line, but definitions can be multi-line and all
lines should be indented consistently.

Links
-----

There are several kinds of links, each with their own uses.

External Links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Links to external documents can be done with the following::

    `External Link to php.net <http://php.net>`_

The resulting link would look like this: `External Link to php.net <http://php.net>`_

Links to Other Pages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rst:role:: doc

    Other pages in the documentation can be linked to using the ``:doc:`` role.
    You can link to the specified document using either an absolute or relative
    path reference. You should omit the ``.rst`` extension. For example, if
    the reference ``:doc:`form``` appears in the document ``core-helpers/html``,
    then the link references ``core-helpers/form``. If the reference was
    ``:doc:`/core-helpers```, it would always reference ``/core-helpers``
    regardless of where it was used.

Cross Referencing Links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rst:role:: ref

    You can cross reference any arbitrary title in any document using the
    ``:ref:`` role. Link label targets must be unique across the entire
    documentation. When creating labels for class methods, it's best to use
    ``class-method`` as the format for your link label.

    The most common use of labels is above a title. Example::

        .. _label-name:

        Section heading
        ---------------

        More content here.

    Elsewhere you could reference the above section using ``:ref:`label-name```.
    The link's text would be the title that the link preceded. You can also
    provide custom link text using ``:ref:`Link text <label-name>```.

Prevent Sphinx to Output Warnings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sphinx will output warnings if a file is not referenced in a toc-tree. It's
a great way to ensure that all files have a link directed to them, but
sometimes, you don't need to insert a link for a file, eg. for our
`epub-contents` and `pdf-contents` files. In those cases, you can add
``:orphan:`` at the top of the file, to suppress warnings that the file is not
in the toc-tree.

Describing Classes and their Contents
-------------------------------------

The CakePHP documentation uses the `phpdomain
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/sphinxcontrib-phpdomain>`_ to provide custom
directives for describing PHP objects and constructs. Using these directives
and roles is required to give proper indexing and cross referencing features.

Describing Classes and Constructs
---------------------------------

Each directive populates the index, and or the namespace index.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:global:: name

   This directive declares a new PHP global variable.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:function:: name(signature)

   Defines a new global function outside of a class.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:const:: name

   This directive declares a new PHP constant, you can also use it nested
   inside a class directive to create class constants.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:exception:: name

   This directive declares a new Exception in the current namespace. The
   signature can include constructor arguments.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:class:: name

   Describes a class. Methods, attributes, and constants belonging to the class
   should be inside this directive's body::

        .. php:class:: MyClass

            Class description

           .. php:method:: method($argument)

           Method description


   Attributes, methods and constants don't need to be nested. They can also just
   follow the class declaration::

        .. php:class:: MyClass

            Text about the class

        .. php:method:: methodName()

            Text about the method


   .. seealso:: :rst:dir:`php:method`, :rst:dir:`php:attr`, :rst:dir:`php:const`

.. rst:directive:: .. php:method:: name(signature)

   Describe a class method, its arguments, return value, and exceptions::

        .. php:method:: instanceMethod($one, $two)

            :param string $one: The first parameter.
            :param string $two: The second parameter.
            :returns: An array of stuff.
            :throws: InvalidArgumentException

           This is an instance method.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:staticmethod:: ClassName::methodName(signature)

    Describe a static method, its arguments, return value and exceptions,
    see :rst:dir:`php:method` for options.

.. rst:directive:: .. php:attr:: name

   Describe an property/attribute on a class.

Prevent Sphinx to Output Warnings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sphinx will output warnings if a function is referenced in multiple files. It's
a great way to ensure that you did not add a function two times, but
sometimes, you actually want to write a function in two or more files, eg.
`debug object` is referenced in `/development/debugging` and in
`/core-libraries/global-constants-and-functions`. In this case, you can add
``:noindex:`` under the function debug to suppress warnings. Keep only
one reference **without** ``:no-index:`` to still have the function referenced::

    .. php:function:: debug(mixed $var, boolean $showHtml = null, $showFrom = true)
        :noindex:

Cross Referencing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following roles refer to PHP objects and links are generated if a
matching directive is found:

.. rst:role:: php:func

   Reference a PHP function.

.. rst:role:: php:global

   Reference a global variable whose name has ``$`` prefix.

.. rst:role:: php:const

   Reference either a global constant, or a class constant. Class constants
   should be preceded by the owning class::

        DateTime has an :php:const:`DateTime::ATOM` constant.

.. rst:role:: php:class

   Reference a class by name::

     :php:class:`ClassName`

.. rst:role:: php:meth

   Reference a method of a class. This role supports both kinds of methods::

     :php:meth:`DateTime::setDate`
     :php:meth:`Classname::staticMethod`

.. rst:role:: php:attr

   Reference a property on an object::

      :php:attr:`ClassName::$propertyName`

.. rst:role:: php:exc

   Reference an exception.


Source Code
-----------

Literal code blocks are created by ending a paragraph with ``::``. The literal
block must be indented, and like all paragraphs be separated by single lines::

    This is a paragraph::

        while ($i--) {
            doStuff()
        }

    This is regular text again.

Literal text is not modified or formatted, save that one level of indentation
is removed.


Notes and Warnings
------------------

There are often times when you want to inform the reader of an important tip,
special note or a potential hazard. Admonitions in sphinx are used for just
that. There are fives kinds of admonitions.

* ``.. tip::`` Tips are used to document or re-iterate interesting or important
  information. The content of the directive should be written in complete
  sentences and include all appropriate punctuation.
* ``.. note::`` Notes are used to document an especially important piece of
  information. The content of the directive should be written in complete
  sentences and include all appropriate punctuation.
* ``.. warning::`` Warnings are used to document potential stumbling blocks, or
  information pertaining to security. The content of the directive should be
  written in complete sentences and include all appropriate punctuation.
* ``.. versionadded:: X.Y.Z`` "Version added" admonitions are used to display notes
  specific to new features added at a specific version, ``X.Y.Z`` being the version on
  which the said feature was added.
* ``.. deprecated:: X.Y.Z`` As opposed to "version added" admonitions, "deprecated"
  admonition are used to notify of a deprecated feature, ``X.Y.Z`` being the version on
  which the said feature was deprecated.

All admonitions are made the same::

    .. note::

        Indented and preceded and followed by a blank line. Just like a
        paragraph.

    This text is not part of the note.

Samples
~~~~~~~

.. tip::

    This is a helpful tid-bit you probably forgot.

.. note::

    You should pay attention here.

.. warning::

    It could be dangerous.

.. versionadded:: 2.6.3

    This awesome feature was added on version 2.6.3

.. deprecated:: 2.6.3

    This old feature was deprecated on version 2.6.3


.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Documentation
    :keywords lang=en: partial translations,translation efforts,html entities,text markup,asfd,asdf,structured text,english content,markdown,formatted text,dot org,repo,consistency,translator,freenode,textile,improvements,syntax,cakephp,submission
