en/orm/behaviors/counter-cache.rst, before:

CounterCache
############

.. php:namespace:: Cake\ORM\Behavior

.. php:class:: CounterCacheBehavior

Often times web applications need to display counts of related objects. For
example, when showing a list of articles you may want to display how many
comments it has. Or when showing a user you might want to show how many
friends/followers she has. The CounterCache behavior is intended for these
situations. CounterCache will update a field in the associated models assigned
in the options when it is invoked. The fields should exist in the database and
be of the type INT.

Basic Usage
===========

You enable the CounterCache behavior like any other behavior, but it won't do
anything until you configure some relations and the field counts that should be
stored on each of them. Using our example below, we could cache the comment
count for each article with the following::

    class CommentsTable extends Table
    {
        public function initialize(array $config)
        {
            $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
                'Articles' => ['comment_count']
            ]);
        }
    }

The CounterCache configuration should be a map of relation names and the
specific configuration for that relation.

The counter's value will be updated each time an entity is saved or deleted. The
counter **will not** be updated when you use ``updateAll()`` or ``deleteAll()``,
or execute SQL you have written.

Advanced Usage
==============

If you need to keep a cached counter for less than all of the related records,
you can supply additional conditions or finder methods to generate a
counter value::

    // Use a specific find method.
    // In this case find(published)
    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'comment_count' => [
                'finder' => 'published'
            ]
        ]
    ]);

If you don't have a custom finder method you can provide an array of conditions
to find records instead::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'comment_count' => [
                'conditions' => ['Comments.spam' => false]
            ]
        ]
    ]);

If you want CounterCache to update multiple fields, for example both showing a
conditional count and a basic count you can add these fields in the array::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => ['comment_count',
            'published_comment_count' => [
                'finder' => 'published'
            ]
        ]
    ]);

Lastly, if a custom finder and conditions are not suitable you can provide
a callback method. This callable must return the count value to be stored::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'rating_avg' => function ($event, $entity, $table) {
                return 4.5;
            }
        ]
    ]);


.. note::

    The CounterCache behavior works for ``belongsTo`` associations only. For
    example for "Comments belongsTo Articles", you need to add the CounterCache
    behavior to the ``CommentsTable`` in order to generate ``comment_count`` for
    Articles table.
    
    It is possible though to make this work for ``belongsToMany`` associations.
    You need to enable the CounterCache behavior in a custom ``through`` table
    configured in association options. See how to configure a custom join table
    :ref:`using-the-through-option`.

Commit message:

Add CounterCache ignoreDirty option doc

en/orm/behaviors/counter-cache.rst, after:

CounterCache
############

.. php:namespace:: Cake\ORM\Behavior

.. php:class:: CounterCacheBehavior

Often times web applications need to display counts of related objects. For
example, when showing a list of articles you may want to display how many
comments it has. Or when showing a user you might want to show how many
friends/followers she has. The CounterCache behavior is intended for these
situations. CounterCache will update a field in the associated models assigned
in the options when it is invoked. The fields should exist in the database and
be of the type INT.

Basic Usage
===========

You enable the CounterCache behavior like any other behavior, but it won't do
anything until you configure some relations and the field counts that should be
stored on each of them. Using our example below, we could cache the comment
count for each article with the following::

    class CommentsTable extends Table
    {
        public function initialize(array $config)
        {
            $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
                'Articles' => ['comment_count']
            ]);
        }
    }

The CounterCache configuration should be a map of relation names and the
specific configuration for that relation.

The counter's value will be updated each time an entity is saved or deleted. The
counter **will not** be updated when you use ``updateAll()`` or ``deleteAll()``,
or execute SQL you have written.

Advanced Usage
==============

If you need to keep a cached counter for less than all of the related records,
you can supply additional conditions or finder methods to generate a
counter value::

    // Use a specific find method.
    // In this case find(published)
    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'comment_count' => [
                'finder' => 'published'
            ]
        ]
    ]);

If you don't have a custom finder method you can provide an array of conditions
to find records instead::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'comment_count' => [
                'conditions' => ['Comments.spam' => false]
            ]
        ]
    ]);

If you want CounterCache to update multiple fields, for example both showing a
conditional count and a basic count you can add these fields in the array::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => ['comment_count',
            'published_comment_count' => [
                'finder' => 'published'
            ]
        ]
    ]);

If you want to calculate the CounterCache field value on your own, you can set the ``ignoreDirty`` option to ``true``.
This will ignore the field from being recalculated, if you've set it dirty before::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'comment_count' => [
                ignoreDirty' => true
            ]
        ]
    ]);

Lastly, if a custom finder and conditions are not suitable you can provide
a callback method. This callable must return the count value to be stored::

    $this->addBehavior('CounterCache', [
        'Articles' => [
            'rating_avg' => function ($event, $entity, $table) {
                return 4.5;
            }
        ]
    ]);


.. note::

    The CounterCache behavior works for ``belongsTo`` associations only. For
    example for "Comments belongsTo Articles", you need to add the CounterCache
    behavior to the ``CommentsTable`` in order to generate ``comment_count`` for
    Articles table.
    
    It is possible though to make this work for ``belongsToMany`` associations.
    You need to enable the CounterCache behavior in a custom ``through`` table
    configured in association options. See how to configure a custom join table
    :ref:`using-the-through-option`.
