en/bake/development.rst, before:

Extending Bake
##############

Bake features an extensible architecture that allows your application or plugins
to modify or add-to the base functionality. Bake makes use of a dedicated
view class which does not use standard PHP syntax.

Bake Events
===========

As a view class, ``BakeView`` emits the same events as any other view class,
plus one extra initialize event. However, whereas standard view classes use the
event prefix "View.", ``BakeView`` uses the event prefix "Bake.".

The initialize event can be used to make changes which apply to all baked
output, for example to add another helper to the bake view class this event can
be used::

    <?php
    // config/bootstrap_cli.php

    use Cake\Event\Event;
    use Cake\Event\EventManager;

    EventManager::instance()->on('Bake.initialize', function (Event $event) {
        $view = $event->getSubject();

        // In my bake templates, allow the use of the MySpecial helper
        $view->loadHelper('MySpecial', ['some' => 'config']);

        // And add an $author variable so it's always available
        $view->set('author', 'Andy');

    });

If you want to modify bake from within another plugin, putting your plugin's
bake events in the plugin ``config/bootstrap.php`` file is a good idea.

Bake events can be handy for making small changes to existing templates.
For example, to change the variable names used when baking controller/template
files one can use a function listening for ``Bake.beforeRender`` to modify the
variables used in the bake templates::

    <?php
    // config/bootstrap_cli.php

    use Cake\Event\Event;
    use Cake\Event\EventManager;

    EventManager::instance()->on('Bake.beforeRender', function (Event $event) {
        $view = $event->getSubject();

        // Use $rows for the main data variable in indexes
        if ($view->get('pluralName')) {
            $view->set('pluralName', 'rows');
        }
        if ($view->get('pluralVar')) {
            $view->set('pluralVar', 'rows');
        }

        // Use $theOne for the main data variable in view/edit
        if ($view->get('singularName')) {
            $view->set('singularName', 'theOne');
        }
        if ($view->get('singularVar')) {
            $view->set('singularVar', 'theOne');
        }

    });

You may also scope the ``Bake.beforeRender`` and ``Bake.afterRender`` events to
a specific generated file. For instance, if you want to add specific actions to
your UsersController when generating from a **Controller/controller.ctp** file,
you can use the following event::

    <?php
    // config/bootstrap_cli.php

    use Cake\Event\Event;
    use Cake\Event\EventManager;
    use Cake\Utility\Hash;

    EventManager::instance()->on(
        'Bake.beforeRender.Controller.controller',
        function (Event $event) {
            $view = $event->getSubject();
            if ($view->viewVars['name'] == 'Users') {
                // add the login and logout actions to the Users controller
                $view->viewVars['actions'] = [
                    'login',
                    'logout',
                    'index',
                    'view',
                    'add',
                    'edit',
                    'delete'
                ];
            }
        }
    );

By scoping event listeners to specific bake templates, you can simplify your
bake related event logic and provide callbacks that are easier to test.

Bake Template Syntax
====================

Bake template files use erb-style (``<% %>``) tags to denote template logic, and
treat everything else including php tags as plain text.

.. note::

    Bake template files do not use, and are insensitive to, ``asp_tags`` php ini setting.

``BakeView`` implements the following tags:

  * ``<%`` A Bake template php open tag
  * ``%>`` A Bake template php close tag
  * ``<%=`` A Bake template php short-echo tag
  * ``<%-`` A Bake template php open tag, stripping any leading whitespace
    before the tag
  * ``-%>`` A Bake template php close tag, stripping trailing whitespace after
    the tag

One way to see/understand how bake templates works, especially when attempting
to modify bake template files, is to bake a class and compare the template used
with the pre-processed template file which is left in the application's
**tmp/bake** folder.

So, for example, when baking a shell like so:

.. code-block:: bash

    bin/cake bake shell Foo

The template used (**vendor/cakephp/bake/src/Template/Bake/Shell/shell.ctp**)
looks like this::

    <?php
    namespace <%= $namespace %>\Shell;

    use Cake\Console\Shell;

    /**
     * <%= $name %> shell command.
     */
    class <%= $name %>Shell extends Shell
    {

        /**
         * main() method.
         *
         * @return bool|int Success or error code.
         */
        public function main()
        {
        }

    }

The pre-processed template file (**tmp/bake/Bake-Shell-shell-ctp.php**), which is the
file actually rendered, looks like this::

    <CakePHPBakeOpenTagphp
    namespace <?= $namespace ?>\Shell;

    use Cake\Console\Shell;

    /**
     * <?= $name ?> shell command.
     */
    class <?= $name ?>Shell extends Shell
    {

        /**
         * main() method.
         *
         * @return bool|int Success or error code.
         */
        public function main()
        {
        }

    }

And the resultant baked class (**src/Shell/FooShell.php**) looks like this::

    <?php
    namespace App\Shell;

    use Cake\Console\Shell;

    /**
     * Foo shell command.
     */
    class FooShell extends Shell
    {

        /**
         * main() method.
         *
         * @return bool|int Success or error code.
         */
        public function main()
        {
        }

    }

.. _creating-a-bake-theme:

Creating a Bake Theme
=====================

If you wish to modify the output produced by the "bake" command, you can
create your own bake 'theme' which allows you to replace some or all of the
templates that bake uses. The best way to do this is:

#. Bake a new plugin. The name of the plugin is the bake 'theme' name
#. Create a new directory **plugins/[name]/src/Template/Bake/Template/**.
#. Copy any templates you want to override from
   **vendor/cakephp/bake/src/Template/Bake/Template** to matching files in your
   plugin.
#. When running bake use the ``--theme`` option to specify the bake-theme you
   want to use.

Customizing the Bake Templates
==============================

If you wish to modify the default output produced by the "bake" command, you can
create your own bake templates in your application. This way does not use the 
``--theme`` option in the command line when baking. The best way to do this is:

#. Create a new directory **/src/Template/Bake/**.
#. Copy any templates you want to override from
   **vendor/cakephp/bake/src/Template/Bake/** to matching files in your
   application.


Creating New Bake Command Options
=================================

It's possible to add new bake command options, or override the ones provided by
CakePHP by creating tasks in your application or plugins. By extending
``Bake\Shell\Task\BakeTask``, bake will find your new task and include it as
part of bake.

As an example, we'll make a task that creates an arbitrary foo class. First,
create the task file **src/Shell/Task/FooTask.php**. We'll extend the
``SimpleBakeTask`` for now as our shell task will be simple. ``SimpleBakeTask``
is abstract and requires us to define 3 methods that tell bake what the task is
called, where the files it generates should go, and what template to use. Our
FooTask.php file should look like::

    <?php
    namespace App\Shell\Task;

    use Bake\Shell\Task\SimpleBakeTask;

    class FooTask extends SimpleBakeTask
    {
        public $pathFragment = 'Foo/';

        public function name()
        {
            return 'foo';
        }

        public function fileName($name)
        {
            return $name . 'Foo.php';
        }

        public function template()
        {
            return 'foo';
        }

    }

Once this file has been created, we need to create a template that bake can use
when generating code. Create **src/Template/Bake/foo.ctp**. In this file we'll
add the following content::

    <?php
    namespace <%= $namespace %>\Foo;

    /**
     * <%= $name %> foo
     */
    class <%= $name %>Foo
    {
        // Add code.
    }

You should now see your new task in the output of ``bin/cake bake``. You can
run your new task by running ``bin/cake bake foo Example``.
This will generate a new ``ExampleFoo`` class in **src/Foo/ExampleFoo.php**
for your application to use.

If you want the ``bake`` call to also create a test file for your
``ExampleFoo`` class, you need to overwrite the ``bakeTest()`` method in the
``FooTask`` class to register the class suffix and namespace for your custom
command name::

    public function bakeTest($className)
    {
        if (!isset($this->Test->classSuffixes[$this->name()])) {
          $this->Test->classSuffixes[$this->name()] = 'Foo';
        }

        $name = ucfirst($this->name());
        if (!isset($this->Test->classTypes[$name])) {
          $this->Test->classTypes[$name] = 'Foo';
        }

        return parent::bakeTest($className);
    }

* The **class suffix** will be appened to the name provided in your ``bake``
  call. In the previous example, it would create a ``ExampleFooTest.php`` file.
* The **class type** will be the sub-namespace used that will lead to your
  file (relative to the app or the plugin you are baking into). In the previous
  example, it would create your test with the namespace ``App\Test\TestCase\Foo``
  .

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Extending Bake
    :keywords lang=en: command line interface,development,bake view, bake template syntax,erb tags,asp tags,percent tags

Commit message:

Add info about setting custom theme as default
Refs cakephp/bake#365

en/bake/development.rst, after:

Extending Bake
##############

Bake features an extensible architecture that allows your application or plugins
to modify or add-to the base functionality. Bake makes use of a dedicated
view class which does not use standard PHP syntax.

Bake Events
===========

As a view class, ``BakeView`` emits the same events as any other view class,
plus one extra initialize event. However, whereas standard view classes use the
event prefix "View.", ``BakeView`` uses the event prefix "Bake.".

The initialize event can be used to make changes which apply to all baked
output, for example to add another helper to the bake view class this event can
be used::

    <?php
    // config/bootstrap_cli.php

    use Cake\Event\Event;
    use Cake\Event\EventManager;

    EventManager::instance()->on('Bake.initialize', function (Event $event) {
        $view = $event->getSubject();

        // In my bake templates, allow the use of the MySpecial helper
        $view->loadHelper('MySpecial', ['some' => 'config']);

        // And add an $author variable so it's always available
        $view->set('author', 'Andy');

    });

If you want to modify bake from within another plugin, putting your plugin's
bake events in the plugin ``config/bootstrap.php`` file is a good idea.

Bake events can be handy for making small changes to existing templates.
For example, to change the variable names used when baking controller/template
files one can use a function listening for ``Bake.beforeRender`` to modify the
variables used in the bake templates::

    <?php
    // config/bootstrap_cli.php

    use Cake\Event\Event;
    use Cake\Event\EventManager;

    EventManager::instance()->on('Bake.beforeRender', function (Event $event) {
        $view = $event->getSubject();

        // Use $rows for the main data variable in indexes
        if ($view->get('pluralName')) {
            $view->set('pluralName', 'rows');
        }
        if ($view->get('pluralVar')) {
            $view->set('pluralVar', 'rows');
        }

        // Use $theOne for the main data variable in view/edit
        if ($view->get('singularName')) {
            $view->set('singularName', 'theOne');
        }
        if ($view->get('singularVar')) {
            $view->set('singularVar', 'theOne');
        }

    });

You may also scope the ``Bake.beforeRender`` and ``Bake.afterRender`` events to
a specific generated file. For instance, if you want to add specific actions to
your UsersController when generating from a **Controller/controller.ctp** file,
you can use the following event::

    <?php
    // config/bootstrap_cli.php

    use Cake\Event\Event;
    use Cake\Event\EventManager;
    use Cake\Utility\Hash;

    EventManager::instance()->on(
        'Bake.beforeRender.Controller.controller',
        function (Event $event) {
            $view = $event->getSubject();
            if ($view->viewVars['name'] == 'Users') {
                // add the login and logout actions to the Users controller
                $view->viewVars['actions'] = [
                    'login',
                    'logout',
                    'index',
                    'view',
                    'add',
                    'edit',
                    'delete'
                ];
            }
        }
    );

By scoping event listeners to specific bake templates, you can simplify your
bake related event logic and provide callbacks that are easier to test.

Bake Template Syntax
====================

Bake template files use erb-style (``<% %>``) tags to denote template logic, and
treat everything else including php tags as plain text.

.. note::

    Bake template files do not use, and are insensitive to, ``asp_tags`` php ini setting.

``BakeView`` implements the following tags:

  * ``<%`` A Bake template php open tag
  * ``%>`` A Bake template php close tag
  * ``<%=`` A Bake template php short-echo tag
  * ``<%-`` A Bake template php open tag, stripping any leading whitespace
    before the tag
  * ``-%>`` A Bake template php close tag, stripping trailing whitespace after
    the tag

One way to see/understand how bake templates works, especially when attempting
to modify bake template files, is to bake a class and compare the template used
with the pre-processed template file which is left in the application's
**tmp/bake** folder.

So, for example, when baking a shell like so:

.. code-block:: bash

    bin/cake bake shell Foo

The template used (**vendor/cakephp/bake/src/Template/Bake/Shell/shell.ctp**)
looks like this::

    <?php
    namespace <%= $namespace %>\Shell;

    use Cake\Console\Shell;

    /**
     * <%= $name %> shell command.
     */
    class <%= $name %>Shell extends Shell
    {

        /**
         * main() method.
         *
         * @return bool|int Success or error code.
         */
        public function main()
        {
        }

    }

The pre-processed template file (**tmp/bake/Bake-Shell-shell-ctp.php**), which is the
file actually rendered, looks like this::

    <CakePHPBakeOpenTagphp
    namespace <?= $namespace ?>\Shell;

    use Cake\Console\Shell;

    /**
     * <?= $name ?> shell command.
     */
    class <?= $name ?>Shell extends Shell
    {

        /**
         * main() method.
         *
         * @return bool|int Success or error code.
         */
        public function main()
        {
        }

    }

And the resultant baked class (**src/Shell/FooShell.php**) looks like this::

    <?php
    namespace App\Shell;

    use Cake\Console\Shell;

    /**
     * Foo shell command.
     */
    class FooShell extends Shell
    {

        /**
         * main() method.
         *
         * @return bool|int Success or error code.
         */
        public function main()
        {
        }

    }

.. _creating-a-bake-theme:

Creating a Bake Theme
=====================

If you wish to modify the output produced by the "bake" command, you can
create your own bake 'theme' which allows you to replace some or all of the
templates that bake uses. The best way to do this is:

#. Bake a new plugin. The name of the plugin is the bake 'theme' name
#. Create a new directory **plugins/[name]/src/Template/Bake/Template/**.
#. Copy any templates you want to override from
   **vendor/cakephp/bake/src/Template/Bake/Template** to matching files in your
   plugin.
#. When running bake use the ``--theme`` option to specify the bake-theme you
   want to use. To avoid having to specify this option in each call, you can also
   set your custom theme to be used as default theme.

    <?php
    // in config/bootstrap.php or config/bootstrap_cli.php
    Configure::write('Bake.theme', 'MyTheme');

Customizing the Bake Templates
==============================

If you wish to modify the default output produced by the "bake" command, you can
create your own bake templates in your application. This way does not use the 
``--theme`` option in the command line when baking. The best way to do this is:

#. Create a new directory **/src/Template/Bake/**.
#. Copy any templates you want to override from
   **vendor/cakephp/bake/src/Template/Bake/** to matching files in your
   application.    

Creating New Bake Command Options
=================================

It's possible to add new bake command options, or override the ones provided by
CakePHP by creating tasks in your application or plugins. By extending
``Bake\Shell\Task\BakeTask``, bake will find your new task and include it as
part of bake.

As an example, we'll make a task that creates an arbitrary foo class. First,
create the task file **src/Shell/Task/FooTask.php**. We'll extend the
``SimpleBakeTask`` for now as our shell task will be simple. ``SimpleBakeTask``
is abstract and requires us to define 3 methods that tell bake what the task is
called, where the files it generates should go, and what template to use. Our
FooTask.php file should look like::

    <?php
    namespace App\Shell\Task;

    use Bake\Shell\Task\SimpleBakeTask;

    class FooTask extends SimpleBakeTask
    {
        public $pathFragment = 'Foo/';

        public function name()
        {
            return 'foo';
        }

        public function fileName($name)
        {
            return $name . 'Foo.php';
        }

        public function template()
        {
            return 'foo';
        }

    }

Once this file has been created, we need to create a template that bake can use
when generating code. Create **src/Template/Bake/foo.ctp**. In this file we'll
add the following content::

    <?php
    namespace <%= $namespace %>\Foo;

    /**
     * <%= $name %> foo
     */
    class <%= $name %>Foo
    {
        // Add code.
    }

You should now see your new task in the output of ``bin/cake bake``. You can
run your new task by running ``bin/cake bake foo Example``.
This will generate a new ``ExampleFoo`` class in **src/Foo/ExampleFoo.php**
for your application to use.

If you want the ``bake`` call to also create a test file for your
``ExampleFoo`` class, you need to overwrite the ``bakeTest()`` method in the
``FooTask`` class to register the class suffix and namespace for your custom
command name::

    public function bakeTest($className)
    {
        if (!isset($this->Test->classSuffixes[$this->name()])) {
          $this->Test->classSuffixes[$this->name()] = 'Foo';
        }

        $name = ucfirst($this->name());
        if (!isset($this->Test->classTypes[$name])) {
          $this->Test->classTypes[$name] = 'Foo';
        }

        return parent::bakeTest($className);
    }

* The **class suffix** will be appened to the name provided in your ``bake``
  call. In the previous example, it would create a ``ExampleFooTest.php`` file.
* The **class type** will be the sub-namespace used that will lead to your
  file (relative to the app or the plugin you are baking into). In the previous
  example, it would create your test with the namespace ``App\Test\TestCase\Foo``
  .

.. meta::
    :title lang=en: Extending Bake
    :keywords lang=en: command line interface,development,bake view, bake template syntax,erb tags,asp tags,percent tags
